An Introduction to Design Thinking PROCESS GUIDE
 "To create meaningful innovations, you need to know your users Empathize and care about their lives." HOW to empathize In empathy work, connect with people and seek stories WHAT is the Empathize mode To empathize, you:
- Observe. View users and their behavior in the context of their lives. As much as possible Empathy is the centerpiece of a human-centered design process. The Empathize mode is do observations in relevant contexts in addition to interviews. Some of the most powerful the work you do to understand people, within the context of your design challenge. It is your realizations come from noticing a disconnect between what someone says and what he does.
effort to understand the way they do things and why, their physical and emotional needs, how Others come from a work-around someone has created which may be very surprising to you as they think about world, and what is meaningful to them.
the designer, but she may not even think to mention in conversation.
- Engage. Sometimes we call this technique 'interviewing' but it should really feel more like WHY empathize a conversation. Prepare some questions you'd like to ask, but expect to let the conversation deviate from them. Keep the conversation only loosely bounded. Elicit stories from the As a design thinker, the problems you are trying to solve are rarely your own-they are those of people you talk to, and always ask "Why?" to uncover deeper meaning. Engagement can come a particular group of people; in order to design for them, you must gain empathy for who they through both short 'intercept' encounters and longer scheduled conversations.
are and what is important to them.
- Watch and Listen. Certainly you can, and should, combine observation and engagement.
Observing what people do and how they interact with their environment gives you clues about Ask someone to show you how they complete a task. Have them physically go through the what they think and feel. It also helps you learn about what they need. By watching people, steps, and talk you through why they are doing what they do. Ask them to vocalize what's you can capture physical manifestations of their experiences - what they do and say. This will going through their mind as they perform a task or interact with an object. Have a conversation allow you to infer the intangible meaning of those experiences in order to uncover insights.
in the context of someone's home or workplace - so many stories are embodied in artifacts.
These insights give you direction to create innovative solutions. The best solutions come out Use the environment to prompt deeper questions.
of the best insights into human behavior. But learning to recognize those insights is harder than you might think. Why? Because our minds automatically filter out a lot of information without our even realizing it. We need to learn to see things "with a fresh set of eyes," and Empathize empathizing is what gives us those new eyes.
Define Transition: Empathize >> Define Engaging with people directly reveals a tremendous amount about the way they think and the values they hold. Sometimes these thoughts and values are not obvious to the people Unpack: When you move from empathy work to drawing conclusions who hold them, and a good conversation can surprise both the designer and the subject by from that work, you need to process all the things you heard and saw the unanticipated insights that are revealed. The stories that people tell and the things that in order to understand the big picture and grasp the takeaways of it all.
people say they do-even if they are different from what they actually do-are strong indicators Unpacking is a chance to start that process - sharing what you found of their deeply held beliefs about the way the world is. Good designs are built on a solid with fellow designers and capturing the important parts in a visual understanding of these beliefs and values.
form. Get all the information out of your head and onto a wall where you can start to make connections-post pictures of your user, post-its with quotes, maps of journeys or experiences-anything that captures impressions and information about your user. This is the beginning of the synthesis process, which leads into a 'Define' mode.
 "Framing the right problem is the only way to create the right solution." Define HOW to define Articulate the meaningful challenge WHAT is the Define mode Consider what stood out to you when talking and observing people. What patterns emerge The Define mode of the design process is all about bringing clarity and focus to the design when you look at the set? If you noticed something interesting ask yourself (and your team) space. It is your chance, and responsibility, as a design thinker to define the challenge you why that might be. In asking why someone had a certain behavior or feeling you are making are taking on, based on what you have learned about your user and about the context. After connections from that person to the larger context. Develop an understanding of the type becoming an instant-expert on the subject and gaining invaluable empathy for the person you of person you are designing for - your USER. Synthesize and select a limited set of NEEDS are designing for, this stage is about making sense of the widespread information you have that you think are important to fulfill; you may in fact express a just one single salient need gathered. to address. Work to express INSIGHTS you developed through the synthesis of information your have gathered through empathy and research work. Then articulate a point-of-view by The goal of the Define mode is to craft a meaningful and actionable problem statement - this combining these three elements - user, need, and insight - as an actionable problem statement is what we call a point-of-view. This should be a guiding statement that focuses on insights and that will drive the rest of your design work.
needs of a particular user, or composite character. Insights don't often just jump in your lap;
rather they emerge from a process of synthesizing information to discover connections and A good point-of-view is one that:
patterns. In a word, the Define mode is sensemaking. - Provides focus and frames the problem - Inspires your team - Informs criteria for evaluating competing ideas WHY define - Empowers your team to make decisions independently in parallel - Captures the hearts and minds of people you meet The Define mode is critical to the design process because it results in your point-of-view - Saves you from the impossible task of developing concepts that are all things to all people (POV): the explicit expression of the problem you are striving to address. More importantly, (i.e. your problem statement should be discrete, not broad.) your POV defines the RIGHT challenge to address, based on your new understanding of people and the problem space. It may seem counterintuitive but crafting a more narrowly Ideate focused problem statement tends to yield both greater quantity and higher quality solutions when you are generating ideas.
Define Transition: Define >> Ideate The Define mode is also an endeavor to synthesize your scattered findings into powerful insights. It is this synthesis of your empathy work that gives you the advantage that no one In the Define mode you determine the specific meaningful challenge to take else has: discoveries that you can leverage to tackle the design challenge; that is, INSIGHT. on, and in the Ideate mode you focus on generating solutions to address that challenge. A well-scoped and -articulated point-of-view will lead you into ideation in a very natural way. In fact, it is a great litmus test of your point-of-view to see if brainstorming topics fall out your POV.
A great transition step to take is to create a list of "How-Might-We . . .?" brainstorming topics that flow from your problem statement. These brainstorming topics typically are subsets of the entire problem, focusing on different aspects of the challenge. Then when you move into ideation you can select different topics, and try out a few to find the sweet spot of where the group can really churn out a large quantity of compelling ideas.
 "It's not about coming up with the 'right' idea, it's about generating the broadest range of possibilities." Ideate Maximize your innovation potential WHAT is the Ideate mode HOW to ideate Ideate is the mode of the design process in which you concentrate on idea generation.
You ideate by combining your conscious and unconscious mind, and rational thoughts with Mentally it represents a process of "going wide" in terms of concepts and outcomes. Ideation imagination. For example, in a brainstorm you leverage the synergy of the group to reach new provides both the fuel and also the source material for building prototypes and getting ideas by building on others' ideas. Adding constraints, surrounding yourself with inspiring innovative solutions into the hands of your users.
related materials, and embracing misunderstanding all allow you to reach further than you could by simply thinking about a problem.
WHY ideate Another ideation technique is building - that is, prototyping itself can be an ideation technique.
In physically making something you come to points where decisions need to be made; this You ideate in order to transition from identifying problems to creating solutions for your users. encourages new ideas to come forward.
Ideation is your chance to combine the understanding you have of the problem space and people you are designing for with your imagination to generate solution concepts. Particularly There are other ideation techniques such as bodystorming, mindmapping, and sketching. But early in a design project, ideation is about pushing for a widest possible range of ideas from one theme throughout all of them is deferring judgment - that is, separating the generation which you can select, not simply finding a single, best solution. The determination of the best of ideas from the evaluation of ideas. In doing so, you give your imagination and creativity solution will be discovered later, through user testing and feedback. a voice, while placating your rational side in knowing that your will get to the examination of merits later.
Various forms of ideation are leveraged to:
- Step beyond obvious solutions and thus increase the innovation potential of your solution set - Harness the collective perspectives and strengths of your teams - Uncover unexpected areas of exploration Ideate - Create fluency (volume) and flexibility (variety) in your innovation options - Get obvious solutions out of your heads, and drive your team beyond them Prototype Transition: Ideate >> Prototype In order to avoid losing all of the innovation potential you have just generated through ideation, we recommend a process of considered selection, by which you bring multiple ideas forward into prototyping, thus maintaining your innovation potential. As a team, designate three voting criteria (we might suggest "the most likely to delight," "the rational choice," "the most unexpected" as potential criteria, but they're really up to you) to use to vote on three different ideas that your team generated during brainstorming. Carry the two or three ideas that receive the most votes forward into prototyping. In this way, you preserve innovation potential by carrying multiple ideas forward-a radically different approach than settling on the single idea that at least the majority of the team can agree upon.
 "Build to think and test to learn." Prototype You can learn a lot from a very simple prototype WHAT is the Prototype mode HOW to prototype The Prototype mode is the iterative generation of artifacts intended to answer questions that Start building. Even if you aren't sure what you're doing, the act of picking up some materials get you closer to your final solution. In the early stages of a project that question may be (post-its, tape, and found objects are a good way to start!) will be enough to get you going.
broad - such as "do my users enjoy cooking in a competitive manner?" In these early stages, you should create low-resolution prototypes that are quick and cheap to make (think minutes Don't spend too long on one prototype. Let go before you find yourself getting too and cents) but can elicit useful feedback from users and colleagues. In later stages both your emotionally attached to any one prototype.
prototype and question may get a little more refined. For example, you may create a later stage prototype for the cooking project that aims to find out: "do my users enjoy cooking with ID a variable. Identify what's being tested with each prototype. A prototype should voice commands or visual commands". answer a particular question when tested. That said, don't be blind to the other tangential understanding you can gain as someone responds to a prototype.
A prototype can be anything that a user can interact with - be it a wall of post-it notes, a gadget you put together, a role-playing activity, or even a storyboard. Ideally you bias toward Build with the user in mind. What do you hope to test with the user? What sorts of behavior something a user can experience. Walking someone through a scenario with a storyboard is do you expect? Answering these questions will help focus your prototyping and help you good, but having them role-play through a physical environment that you have created will receive meaningful feedback in the testing phase.
likely bring out more emotions and responses from that person.
WHY prototype To ideate and problem-solve. Build to think.
Prototype To communicate. If a picture is worth a thousand words, a prototype is worth a thousand pictures. Test Transition: Prototype >> Test To start a conversation. Your interactions with users are often richer when centered around a conversation piece. A prototype is an opportunity to have another, directed conversation with Prototype and Test are modes that you consider in tandem more than you a user.
transition between. What you are trying to test and how you are going to test that To fail quickly and cheaply. Committing as few resources as possible to each idea means less aspect are critically important to consider before you create a prototype.
time and money invested up front.
To test possibilities. Staying low-res allows you to pursue many different ideas without Examining these two modes in conjunction brings up the layers of testing a committing to a direction too early on. prototype. Though prototyping and testing are sometimes entirely intertwined, To manage the solution-building process. Identifying a variable also encourages you to break it is often the case that planning and executing a successful testing scenario is a a large problem down into smaller, testable chunks. considerable additional step after creating a prototype. Don't assume you can simply put a prototype in front of a user to test it; often the most informative results will be a product of careful thinking about how to test in a way that will let users give you the most natural and honest feedback.
 "Testing is an opportunity to learn about your solution and your user." Test The key to user testing is listening.
WHAT is the Test mode HOW to test The Test mode is when you solicit feedback, about the prototypes you have created, from Show don't tell. Put your prototype in the user's hands - or your user within an experience.
your users and have another opportunity to gain empathy for the people you are designing for.
And don't explain everything (yet). Let your tester interpret the prototype. Watch how they Testing is another opportunity to understand your user, but unlike your initial empathy mode, use (and misuse!) what you have given them, and how they handle and interact with it; then you have now likely done more framing of the problem and created prototypes to test. Both listen to what they say about it, and the questions they have.
these things tend to focus the interaction with users, but don't reduce your "testing" work to asking whether or not people like your solution. Instead, continue to ask "Why?", and focus on Create Experiences. Create your prototypes and test them in a way that feels like an what you can learn about the person and the problem as well as your potential solutions.
experience that your user is reacting to, rather than an explanation that your user is evaluating.
Ideally you can test within a real context of the user's life. For a physical object, ask people Ask users to compare. Bringing multiple prototypes to the field to test gives users a basis for to take it with them and use it within their normal routines. For an experience, try to create comparison, and comparisons often reveal latent needs.
a scenario in a location that would capture the real situation. If testing a prototype in situ is not possible, frame a more realistic situation by having users take on a role or task when approaching your prototype. A rule of thumb: always prototype as if you know you're right, but test as if you know you're wrong-testing is the chance to refine your solutions and make them better.
Empathize Ideate Iteration and making Define Prototype WHY test the process your own Test To refine prototypes and solutions. Testing informs the next iterations of prototypes.
Iteration is a fundamental of good design. Iterate both by cycling through the Sometimes this means going back to the drawing board.
process multiple times, and also by iterating within a step-for example by creating multiple prototypes or trying variations of a brainstorming topics with multiple To learn more about your user. Testing is another opportunity to build empathy through groups. Generally as you take multiple cycles through the design process your observation and engagement-it often yields unexpected insights.
scope narrows and you move from working on the broad concept to the nuanced details, but the process still supports this development.
To refine your POV. Sometimes testing reveals that not only did you not get the solution right, but also that you failed to frame the problem correctly.
For simplicity, the process is articulated here as a linear progression, but design challenges can be taken on by using the design modes in various orders;
furthermore there are an unlimited number of design frameworks with which to work. The process presented here is one suggestion of a framework; ultimately you will make the process your own and adapt it to your style and your work. Hone your own process that works for you. Most importantly, as you continue to practice innovation you take on a designerly mindset that permeates the way you work, regardless of what process you use.