CPSC408: Database Management Fall 2025 Course Syllabus General Information Instructor: Sierra Clibourne (clibourne@chapman.edu) Lecture: M/W 5:30PM - 6:45PM or 7PM - 8:15PM Keck Room 156 Office Hours: M/W 8:15PM - 9:15PM, Swenson Room N206 Course Description Prerequisite, CPSC 350. Students learn data management concepts and the representation and structure of data in the context of applications and system software.
The emphasis is on design of databases and developing applications in a client-server environment using SQL as the query language. 3 credits.
Course Learning Outcomes 1. Design database schemas using UML and entity-relationship diagrams.
2. Introduce a relational database server (i.e. SQL Server, MySQL.) 3. Implement database applications with Python DB Connector.
4. Understand the ACID properties and their relationship to transaction control.
5. Integrate various data sources into a single relational database instance.
6. Model schemas and queries using relational algebra 7. Validate referential integrity constraints using techniques such as assertions and triggers.
8. Understand the importance of schema normalization and be able to transform arbitrary schemas to 3NF and BCNF.
9. Evaluate indexing techniques based on the type and quantity of data to be queried.
10. Discuss NoSQL databases.
Program Learning Outcomes The Chapman experience creates outcomes which are consistent with our identity.
Similar to the General Education program, each degree program, or major, at Chapman has a unique set of learning outcomes, or student abilities that are not only related to Chapman's institutional mission and goals, but also unique to the student's discipline or field of study. For more information, Fowler School of Engineering Program Learning Outcomes.
 Overview CPSC 408 is an upper-division course designed to introduce students to the fundamentals of relational database management systems. After an introduction to the relational model and its corresponding algebra, students will learn the essentials of database schema design and normalization, as well as how to effectively process data using SQL. Students will learn to interact with databases using standard technologies and will have an opportunity to become familiar with the popular database systems SQLite and MySQL. Advanced topics such as NoSQL databases, data warehousing, and database internals will be covered as time allows.
Course Materials All course materials will be made available via the course site on Canvas when possible. Canvas will also be used for submitting assignments, viewing grades, etc.
Course Grade Breakdown Letter grades in the class will be assigned according to the following breakdown:
Grade Letter Grade 93+ A 90-92.9 A87-89.9 B+ 83-86.9 B 80-82.9 B77-79.9/73-76.9/70-72.9 C+/C/C67-69.9/63-66.9/60-62.9 D+/D/D- <60 F You must score a 70 or above to receive a P when taking the course P/NP.
Assignments Assignments may consist of:
1) Short written problem sets.
2) Complex and involved assignments to reinforce skills in database design and application programming.
Assignments are intended to prepare you for exams. Students will also complete a final project which will involve the implementation of a database system and corresponding application program to interface with that database.
 Late Policy As I know life can get hectic and everything does not always go to plan, I will permit each student a single extension on any homework assignment or project as long as I have been notified at least 24 hours in advance of the due date. The duration of the extension will vary on a case by case basis depending on assignment and circumstances. To request an extension, email me at clibourne@chapman.edu at least 24 hours before the assignment is due. Generally, no late work will be accepted outside of this policy. This includes instances of not hitting submit or submitting incorrect files.
You are responsible for ensuring the correct files are submitted by the deadline. The timestamp on a file that missed a deadline is not valid. There are no extensions for in class quizzes, midterms, or exams without prior approval and extenuating circumstances.
In exchange for this slightly stricter late policy: I will allow resubmissions to recover points for any assignments submitted on time, as long as an obvious good-faith effort has been made in the original submission. It will be up to my discretion on what counts as a good-faith effort on the original submission, but in general as long as this system does not seem to be in abuse I will continue the permission.
Participation and Quizzes It is expected that students attend every lecture. Participation in these sessions will contribute to the final course grade. There may also be occasional quizzes on the reading and lecture material, which will count toward the participation grade. If you miss an in class quiz for any reason, you CANNOT make it up.
Exams There will be a midterm exam and a final exam, which must be taken on the dates specified. No makeup exams will be administered, except in the case of a medical exemption.
Grading Percentages Breakdown:
Attendance/Participation/Quizzes 10 % Assignments 30 % Midterm 20 % Final Project 20 % Final Exam 20 % Assignment Grading Assignments will be graded for correctness, completeness, and elegance of solution.
Programming assignments will also be graded on adherence to best practices and conventions.
 Collaboration Policy You have much to learn from your colleagues, and so I encourage you to discuss and study course material together. However, all work you submit for this course must be your own and must be completed individually unless otherwise specified. More specifically, you may not present source code or programs copied from the internet, other texts, other students, LLMs, etc. as your own work. Of course, you are free to use whatever reference materials you like, but please cite them in a README turned in with your assignments. I expect you to cite all external sites and resources used for each assignment, and I expect you to be able to accurately defend your assignment responses if any citation violations are suspected.
There will also be assignments within which LLM use will be explicitly prohibited. Please see each individual assignment for specific instructions, as I expect you to adhere to each assignment's requirements regarding LLM use. There is zero tolerance for plagiarism in this class, and you will earn a non-recoverable zero on any assignments where you are found to have submitted plagiarized work or work that falls outside of posted requirements.
I assume you are familiar with Chapman's policy on academic misconduct. It is presented below, and any incidents of academic misconduct or dishonesty will be dealt with severely in accordance with this policy.
Chapman University's Academic Integrity Policy Chapman University is a community of scholars that emphasizes the mutual responsibility of all members to seek knowledge honestly and in good faith. Students are responsible for doing their own work and academic dishonesty of any kind will be subject to sanction by the instructor/administrator and referral to the university Academic Integrity Committee, which may impose additional sanctions including expulsion. Please see the full description of Chapman University's policy on Academic Integrity.
Chapman University's Students with Disabilities Policy In compliance with ADA guidelines, students who have any condition, either permanent or temporary, that might affect their ability to perform in this class are encouraged to contact the Office of Disability Services. If you will need to utilize your approved accommodations in this class, please follow the proper notification procedure for informing your professor(s). This notification process must occur more than a week before any accommodation can be utilized. Please contact Disability Services at (714) 516-4520 if you have questions regarding this procedure or for information or to make an appointment to discuss and/or request potential accommodations based on documentation of your disability. Once formal approval of your need for an accommodation has been granted, you are encouraged to talk with your professor(s) about your accommodation options. The granting of any accommodation will not be retroactive and cannot jeopardize the academic standards or integrity of the course.
 Chapman University's Anti-Discrimination Policy Chapman University is committed to ensuring equality and valuing diversity, including of backgrounds, experiences and viewpoints. Students and professors are reminded to show respect at all times as outlined in Chapman's Harassment and Discrimination Policy. Please review the full description of the Harassment and Discrimination Policy.
Any violations of this policy should be discussed with the professor, the Dean of Students and/or otherwise reported in accordance with this policy.
Student Support at Chapman University Over the course of the semester, you may experience a range of challenges that interfere with your learning, such as problems with friend, family, and or significant other relationships; substance use; concerns about personal adequacy; feeling overwhelmed;
or feeling sad or anxious without knowing why. These mental health concerns or stressful events may diminish your academic performance and/or reduce your ability to participate in daily activities. You can learn more about the resources available through Chapman University's Student Psychological Counseling Services.
Fostering a community of care that supports the success of students is essential to the values of Chapman University. Occasionally, you may come across a student whose personal behavior concerns or worries you, either for the student's well-being or yours.
In these instances, you are encouraged to contact the Chapman University Student Concern Intervention Team who can respond to these concerns and offer assistance.
While it is preferred that you include your contact information so this team can follow up with you, you can submit a report anonymously. 24-hour emergency help is also available through Public Safety at 714-997-6763.
Religious Accommodation Religious Accommodation at Chapman University Consistent with our commitment of creating an academic community that is respectful of and welcoming to persons of differing backgrounds, we believe that every reasonable effort should be made to allow members of the university community to fulfill their obligations to the university without jeopardizing the fulfillment of their sincerely held religious obligations. Please review the syllabus early in the semester and consult with your faculty member promptly regarding any possible conflicts with major religious holidays, being as specific as possible regarding when those holidays are scheduled in advance and where those holidays constitute the fulfillment of your sincerely held religious beliefs.
Statement on Diversity and Inclusion At Chapman University, we strive to make meaningful and lasting connections - with one another and with our broader community and world. We aim to cultivate a welcoming environment, helping every person feel valued and empowered to engage and contribute. Our community members are part of the Chapman Family, where relationships matter - and so do ideas. We strive for a vibrant intellectual community where different perspectives are sought and encouraged freely - to enable new thinking to emerge and interdisciplinary dots to be connected. Through these connections, we advance as individuals, as a campus, and as a society.
 Changes This syllabus is subject to change only under extenuating circumstances. Updates will be posted on the course website.